
[[HGC]]
[[CMS]]


This August, CMU physicists working on the CMS experiment at CERN's
Large Hadron Collider (LHC) successfully built and tested prototypes
for the High-Granularity Calorimeter upgrade.  Building functional
prototypes is, on one hand, a major milestone which has been several
years in the making, and on the other, only the first step in a
manufacturing project that will take place over the next three years.

The CMS experiment is one of two general purpose detectors at the LHC.
CMS can be thought of as a large 3D camera that records the products
of the proton collisions provided by the LHC. Images collected from
the detector were used to discover the Higgs boson in 2012. Since its
discovery, a major focus of the field has been in studying the
properties of the Higgs boson in detail. Comparing these measurements
to predictions will allow new theories to be tested and will further
our understanding of this unique particle. However, to significantly
improve the precision of the Higgs boson measurements more data is
needed.

The LHC has a 15 year program to increase the total number of proton
collisions by a factor of 20.  This program requires collecting more
data faster and comes at a significant cost: increased radiation.  In
addition to producing new exotic states of matter -- like the Higgs
boson -- LHC proton collisions produce large amounts of ionizing
radiation.  This radiation is similar to that produced by a nuclear
reactor and is damaging to both people and the instrumentation that
makes up the detector. The current CMS detector was built almost 20
years ago and was not designed to be able to handle the amount of
radiation damage foreseen in the upgraded LHC running. New, upgraded
detectors are needed both to improve the quality of the recorded
images and to cope with the more challenging radiation
environment. This is where the High-Granularity Calorimeter upgrade
comes in.

The High-Granularity Calorimeter (HGC) is a new detector that will
replace the current CMS detectors in the regions which face the most
radiation. The HGC is a next-generation imaging calorimeter that will
significantly increase the precision with which the LHC collisions are
imaged; e.g.: the number of individual measurements per picture will
increase from ∼ 20k in current detectors to ∼6M in HGC, an example of
big data getting bigger.  The measurements of individual particles
will go from the handful of numbers that the current detector provides
to a high-resolution 3D movie of how the particles interact as they
traverse the detector.

The HGC will be built in the next five years and CMU is playing a
leading role in its construction. The HGC will be composed of 30,000
8-inch hexagonal modules.  The modules -- essentially radiation
tolerant digital cameras -- will be tiled to form wheels that are
several meters in diameter; these wheels will then be stacked to form
the full 3D detector. In total, the HGC will require 600 m^2 of active
silicon sensors.

We will build and test 5000 of these modules at CMU. The remaining
modules will be produced by CMS collaborators at UC Santa Barbara and
Texas Tech University in the US, and by groups in China, India and
Taiwan.  Each module consists of a silicon sensor attached to printed
circuit board housing readout electronics and to a base plate which
provides cooling and overall stability.  Module construction will be
performed with a series of automated robots which use
pattern-recognition algorithms for assembly and to make the required
~200 electrical connections per module. After a series of testing at
CMU and Fermilab -- a US particle physics lab outside of Chicago --
the modules will be sent to CERN for installation.

The production of the first working modules this summer was part of a
qualifying exercise in which the various module assembly centers
convinced ourselves and the rest of the CMS collaboration that we are
ready and able to build the high-quality modules needed by HGC. To get
to this point, our group has established a class 1,000 clean-room on
the 8th floor of Wean Hall, expanding an existing space used by the
medium-energy physics group. We have installed and commissioned an
8000 pound gantry robot, used to attach the different module layers,
and an automated wire bonder, used to make the electrical connections
within the modules.  The recently produced prototype modules have
allowed us to test our automated assembly procedures and exercise the
full production chain.

"XXXXXXXXX" Quote from Manfred here 

Producing one module to specification is just the beginning, during
full-scale module production -- starting in 2024 -- CMU will make up
to 24 modules per day. A major challenge in ramping throughput will be
recruiting and on-boarding local talent. To meet production needs we
will need to grow our group to five full-time technicians and
engineers who will work on the daily production line.


Implementing reliable test procedures for quality control is another
major challenge going forward. The module production will be
pipe-lined with a several-day start-to-finish time per module. It will
thus be critical to catch and fix any flaws in production as quickly
as possible. The test procedures will be developed mainly by postdocs
and graduate students and will provide an opportunity for a
significant number of CMU undergraduates to get hands-on experience
testing modern particle physics detectors.  "QUOTE here about unique
time to get involved in this research perfect time for to contribute
to the upgraded LHC detectors". We believe that recent advances in
image processing from Machine Learning will be crucial in assuring
quality control during production. This work, a mix of computer
science, machine learning and robotics, is a perfect fit for CMU and
we plan to tap into resources throughout the university.

(John Alison)
