# News
- Senor pickup tools are here.. Have then all
- No word on parts 4 Ti Baseplates + O(15 CuT) / v3b 
- Order transfer tape ... 
- Meeting tomorrow 11 EST


# Action

- [ ] Follow up with FMS re:humidity (Jeff Harris)
- [x] Order Boxes
- [x] Order crates
- [x] Order MMTS
- [x] I just wanted to urge all of you to test your Juloabo chillers as soon as you are able to.  During the initial tests at TTU, Vladimir found out that our chiller needed repairs despite being brand new.  So, we are sending it back after consulting with Julabo.  Luckily we still had the shipping crate.  So, please test it and make sure it works properly.  Vladimir can give you more info if you need it.


# Jessica
- No module assembly since last meeting 
- grade C vs grade F 
- Have tooling ready to go.... Need parts
- Have off bond tower will save time on bonder
- Waiting on Box
- 3 cabinates in main lab
- 2 in testing 
- humidity and temp sensor working
- particulate counter in progress

# Jonas 
- Sensor ID reading in lab view... mostly there... chipped up. 

# Josh 
- Logan Jr
- Calculation of encapsulant 

# Ornella
- Ordering process. Tab for inventory. Tab for weekly.
- Parts for unistrut. 
- Desicant

# Joy
- Follow updates on grading

# Andrew
- Couple of things: ruchi (Alabama and FNAL)

# Sindhu
- bonder GUI updates
- entries missing for a couple modules 116 / 110
- Discussion re:QC data from manufacture 
- Close to Pendastal data in the DB 
- 

# Follow-ups


# Links: 
[[CMU HGC MAC Meeting 22 April 2025]]


202504291125
