(**Due Date:** 03/19/2025)
Proposal Title: Machine Learning in Front-End Electronics for Nuclear Physics Experiments

# Notes: 

Not clear why ML is needed in Neutrinoless Double Beta Decay

For EIC and Pioneer:
Data reduction during acquisition includes zero- and noise suppression, binning of data into given time windows or clock cycles, feature reconstruction, and data compression. ML-based algorithms deployed on-chip or in the front-end on an FPGA offer an opportunity for real-time processing of raw data from fast timing detectors, including the selection of signals from noise and hit reconstructing using both spatial and timing information.

-  Fast real-time energy and position reconstruc- tion and particle identification will be critical for the future Barium-tagging upgrade in nEXO.

- The use of prototype detectors offers a unique opportunity to address the challenges of deploying ML algorithms on FPGA in nuclear physics experiments.
- As part of this proposal, multiple prototype systems will provide high-quality, real-world datasets for developing and evaluating ML-based readout systems while also serving as a platform for hands-on training for students and postdoctoral researchers.
- Development of  4D Tracking prototype detector in two years, and only assigning primary manpower at the beginning of Year 1 -- seems unrealistic

	3 postdocs + 5 GSRs

#### 1. Scientific and/or Technical Merit of the Project
- What is the scientific innovation of the proposed research?
- What is the likelihood of achieving valuable results?
-  How might the results of the proposed work impact the direction, progress, and thinking in relevant scientific fields of research?
- How does the proposed work compare with other efforts in its field, both in terms of scientific and/or technical merit and originality?
-  Does the application specify at least one scientific hypothesis motivating the proposed work? Is the investigation of the specified hypothesis or hypotheses scientifically valuable?
-  Is the Data Management Plan suitable for the proposed research? To what extent does it support the validation of research results? To what extent will research products, including data, be made available and reusable to advance the field of research?



"This proposal addresses the critical need for real-time data processing in nuclear experiments by developing and implementing ML algorithms on FPGAs."
We will develop real-time ML algorithms for Xenon-based neutrinoless double-beta (0νββ) decay experiments (KamLAND2-Zen and nEXO) to enhance event identification and background rejection, improving the sensitivity of these crucial experiments searching for physics beyond the Standard Model.
We will also design and implement ML-based real-time data processing for the complex data streams generated by the 4D Tracking Detector for the Electron-Ion Collider (EIC) and the PIONEER experiment,
We will develop adaptable ML-based Data Acquisition (DAQ) systems for various prototype detectors in our laboratories, providing a flexible platform for testing and validating new detector technologies. Furthermore, we will implement an advanced framework for deploying modern ML structures on FPGA.


#### 2. Appropriateness of the Proposed Method or Approach

- How logical and feasible are the research approaches?
- Does the proposed research employ innovative concepts or methods?
- Can the approach proposed concretely contribute to our understanding of the validity of the specified scientific hypothesis or hypotheses?
- Are the conceptual framework, methods, and analyses well justified, adequately developed, and likely to lead to scientifically valid conclusions?
- Does the applicant recognize significant potential problems and consider alternative strategies?
- Is the proposed research aligned with the published program priorities identified or incorporated by reference in Section I of this FOA?
- Does the proposed plan to recruit and retain students and early-stage investigators provide sufficient mentorship?



#### 3. Competency of Applicant’s Personnel and Adequacy of Proposed Resources
- How well qualified is the research team to carry out the proposed research?
- Is the lead institution proposing to perform a greater portion of the scientific and technical work than any other team member?
- Are the research environment and facilities adequate for performing the research?
- Does the proposed work take advantage of unique facilities and capabilities?

PI Li has played a key role in applying ML techniques to both EXO-200 and nEXO.
#### 4. Reasonableness and Appropriateness of the Proposed Budget 
- Are the proposed budget and staffing levels adequate to carry out the proposed research?
- Is the budget reasonable and appropriate for the scope?
- If consultant costs are included, are the overall consultant costs are in line with the EPSCoR mission and how will the skills, expertise or capabilities provided by the consultant will be transferred in a sustainable manner to the applicant institution?



#### 5.Synergism Among the PIs in a Program and the Programmatic Focus of a Multi-PI Effort 
- How does the application exhibit a coherent focus on one energy-related research area bringing together multiple researchers?
- What aspects of the management plan will support coordination of multiple investigators working on a common theme including performance milestones and a timetable for achieving project goals and deliverables?_

#### 6. The Likelihood of Success of the Implementation Grant
  
-  How well does the application couple with opportunities within the jurisdiction(s) to develop
- - lize the scientific and technological resources that reside in the research universities and the jurisdiction’s industrial or economic resources?
- How does the application adequately present the opportunities for enhanced academic research and development competitiveness and if appropriate, industrial or economic competitiveness, for the jurisdiction, including plans for the acquisition of sustained non- EPSCoR support?
- What plans does the applicant have to make (or has the applicant made) competitive faculty hires and retained outstanding faculty within the scope of the implementation award? Does the applicant have a plan to attract (or has the applicant hired) outstanding graduate students and post docs?
- What plans do the applicant have to develop (or have they developed) as part of the implementation grant unique infrastructure capabilities that are critical to the advancement of science or technology? Alternatively, are they planning to or making unique contributions to DOE oriented capabilities (e.g., building or developing unique capabilities for a DOE experiment or facility)?
- What plans do the applicant have to (or are the grantees on track to) achieve a sustainable leadership position in their discipline(s)?
- What plans do the applicant have to (or are the grantees effectively) leveraging DOE funding and capabilities with local and regional resources? Are there commitments from the applicant’s jurisdiction, institution or from private sources to assist in this leveraging?_

# Overall Summary of the Proposal
An overall score is requested to accompany the summary section.

Strongly encourage funding (5 or 6);

Encourage funding (3 or 4); or

Discourage funding (1 or 2)

# Follow-ups


# Links: 



202503021349
